Title: Rust 2019: abolish all teams
Category: Blog
Tags: /dev/diary, rust
Date: 2019-01-15

**Disclaimer** this post contains my personal opinions
and does not reflect on either my employer or the Rust project as a whole!

## The TLDR

Originally I was going to write a long and drawn out post, with a lot of snark,
explaining why I feel that the current team structure in the Rust project is bad,
and why it should be overhauled.
I did at no point call for _all_ teams to be abolished
(do however fucking abolish ICE!),
but rather called for a reform on certain teams as well as team membership policies.

Why am I writing this tldr then? 

Well, because this is the internet,
and the world is fast and hectic and I felt like writing a blog post,
where I came across like an asshole for 2/3s of it would not have been the best idea.

The blog post is nearly as long as it once was, but with less snark.
And I want you to be aware of this TLDR as you're reading it.
Call it the abstract to get you interested, if you will...

## Some background

As the year was drawing to a close, a lot of people
from various involvement-groups of the Rust project started publishing their "Rust 2019" posts.
Last year around this time I hadn't really been involved in the projet enough
to warrant writing one, this year feels kinda different though.

If you remember, I wrote a post [how Rust helped] me understand 
the values of "right tool for the right job"
and also remaking a project I had given up on.

[how Rust helped]: /blog/failure-or-why-rust-is-probably-the-best-programming-language-ever-created

This year a bunch of stuff in my life changed.
Earlier this year, at the all-hands, I got involved in the development of Rust itself a lot more.
I'm now in the Community Team and the CLI-WG, and contributing to various tools around the ecosystem.
It's been an absolutely incredibly and rewarding year to work on stuff alongside such amazing,
talented and compassionate people.

This post is about none of that.
Nor is it about the technical visions and ideas I have, going into the new year.

## Organisation Dept

When I was at RustRush Moscow, waiting for people in a hotel lobby,
withoutboats published a blog post entitled ["Organisational Dept"],
which I can really only recommend everybody should read.
In it they outline problems within the governance structure of the Rust project,
failure to scale and remain open in all of the processes,
that exist in the development of a language and ecosystem.

["Organisational Dept"]: https://boats.gitlab.io/blog/post/rust-2019/

I had been thinking about some of these issues before myself.
In fact, there have been several incidents recently,
that have made me doubt the effectiveness of the Rust governance structure.
I don't want to mention any specifically here,
not wanting to add onto the dog-piling that some members of the community have been involved in.
Nor do I want to make any excuses for these people.

Needless to say, I don't think it's a hot take to say that the Rust project has growing issues.

## Transparency

The Rust language was largely developed by the community.

Yes, the core team is full of people from Mozilla and companies that are directly
or indirectly funded by Mozilla,
but at large, most people in the development teams aren't directly affiliated.
From the very beginning the Rust project has had an open process for development.
RFCs were adopted early to guide the design of the language
and openness in the development process was regarded as important.

**Really, the issues we face today are because of this strive for openness.**

A language development team that can work in a small group and simply
announce their progress from time to time is going to have
none of the problems that plague the Rust community today.

With this in mind, it is frustrating to see some recent developments in how decisions were made.
None of these were by design, nobody knowlingly or purpusefully changed the way that
collaboration happened, these are simply problems of *scale*.
In fact, these problems have been known about and awknowledged by many many other people.
I'm hardly the first person to talk about it. Nor will I be the last.

## Why teams?

The basic idea of a team is to give a group of people a common purpose to work on things.
"Too many cooks spoil the soup" and all that. Thus smaller teams mean easier collaboration
between people, on various things.

The idea behind teams isn't even neccessarily a bad one
(the title of this blog post might be a little clickbatey ... woops 🙊).

Teams are rather static, which makes them different from the "working groups",
that the Rust project has experimented around with for the "Rust 2018" edition.
This means that there is such a thing as "team membership",
which includes being advertised on the website as well as
some unwritten rules about *how* to become a member.
This can be frustrating from both the "I want to be on a team, but am not" as well as the
"Why am I/is that person on a team, they're not really active anymore" side of things.
Both are sentiments that I've heard from various people throughout last year.

The aforementioned "working groups" on the other hand are very different.
While their reason for existing is similar to teams, their governance is vastly different.
Instead of having a fixed membership, their participation is a lot more fluid.
There are no real requirements for joining a working group,
other than showing up and doing some stuff.
Even just contributing to a conversation or discussion means that you are,
in a sense, part of the working group.

This puts them in direct contrast to the static team membership,
and also opens up the floor to a lot more people to contribute and get involved,
without feeling that they need to compete with a pre-existing hierarchy.

**In my opinion, working groups form a much better basis for collaboration than teams!**

Before we get into the nitty gritty though, I want to step back a little...

## Vision vs. Implementation

Fundamentally there are two parts to the design of a language (or...most other things actually):

**Vision** is what drives the project forward, 
creating new concepts and thinking about their implications,
while **Implementation** is finding the most elegant, 
sustainable and performant way of making vision a reality!

Now, these two can very often not be separated as easily as I make it out there.
Take the example of the CLI-WG.
When we first assembled earlier this year, we started working on a vision:
"how should CLI development look".
What followed then was an implementation of the vision, 
as closely as we could manage with the resources and time available.
I would argue that during the implementation period of the vision,
some aspects of *what* we thought should be done
were influenced by things we learned about *how* to do them.
Like hitting a moving target.
To some extent this is how most software development works,
unless you are working towards a *very* well defined spec!

Having the same team be in charge of both the overall 
vision for a system and it's implementation isn't a bad thing,
**given that the system is small enough!**

This is where things become problematic. This isn't due to the nature of teams in general, but the core team explicitly.

## What is the core team?

The core team is a medium sized group of veteran Rust developers
who oversee large areas of the development of Rust.
As the website puts it:

> Overall direction and policies of the project,
> subteam leadership, cross-cutting concerns.

Unfortunately that's not what has happened in practice.

Instead, the core team has had a quite fundamental role
in the implementation aspect of Rust's vision for the Rust 2018 edition.
And while it's understandable that this has happened,
it's by no means a positive development.
In fact I would argue that it's been detremental to the overall communication
between other teams and has meant that development efforts on core language features
and additions have shifted away from the public space instead to a small group of people,
with near-static and intransparent team membership.

This needs to change!

## So then...how?

Abolish the core team!
<!-- (and borders and cops and fucking burn down the god damn system) -->

The Rust project has no place for an oligarchy of developers,
who semi-privately guide not just the vision of the language
but also it's implementation.
Even if conversations don't *technically* happen in private,
to any outsider or only slightly-involved person,
the authority of the core team and the existing social bonds between people
will feel like a wall, keeping them out.

(Please understand that I'm not trying to attack any particular (or any) members of the core team,
but instead the institutions that they exist in.
These are institutional problems, no personal ones.
There's no bad actors that make the system suck, the system just sucks)
<!-- see capitalism -->

This shouldn't even be such a hot take,
given that literally the [keynote from RustConf] last year was about issues like this.
Ashley, Niko and Aaron called themselves out in context of the "module system discussion"
about having done conversations in an in-group,
while writing an RFC that impacted the language quite significantly.
A process isn't just open when people get to have influence on what decisions are taken,
but only when the decision creation process is open as well!

[keynote from RustConf]: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=J9OFQm8Qf1I

## Wrapping up

I could go on about this, but I kinda wanna get to a point.
What is my point here?

First of all, I really like the concept of working groups.
They are a low-barrier of entry system to get people involved
in the domain-specific planning and execution of certain language ecosystems.
And they provide a friendly way for outsiders to stick their heads in the door
to checkout out how all this stuff works, 
and maybe get involved in more central ways down the line.
Again...this is literally how I joined the Rust project.

But secondly...

Maybe (not just maybe) "abolish the core team" is hyperbole.
But we need to refine it.
Because in it's current form it just doesn't work and it's having negative effects for the project,
as well as the people *on* the team, who are burning out from the work they are doing.

What's the idea then, you may ask?

Simple: **Rotate the team!**

Letting a small group of people who remain members,
until they no longer want to work on that position,
decide the vision of the project isn't eactly democratic.

And I'm not saying there need to be regular elections.
I'm not calling to create a government here!
What I'm saying is that we should have a conversation about the *possibility* of having a process,
in which the Rust project core team is rotated around, giving more people the ability to contribute
in that role.
What it also means is that there is precedence for someone from the core team to
*no longer be on the core team*, if they - say - have too much other stuff going on!

The core team would at this point be disconnected from pretty much all implementation details,
be in charge of creating new sub-teams for domains that are deemed important,
steer general RFC creation (by the domain-specific teams!)
and help with overall communication.

The core team would still hold a lot of responsibility.
Looking at where Rust is `$now` and trying to estimate where it will be in `$timespan`,
and what actions should be put in motion to make a certain change happen in one way or another
is no small task and shouldn't be underestimated.
I would argue that someone who is on the core team,
could maybe have time to be active (full time) in one other team,
and maybe losely involved in conversation in a third. 

Because at some point we need to face the fact that days are only 24 hours long,
and people shouldn't burn out because of their involvement with the Rust project.

So there. That's my hot take.

Feedback: [hate@spacekookie.de](mailto:hate@spacekookie.de)
